I used to say this to CEOs all the time
when I was a venture capitalist your job
isn't to work hard your job is to have
great ideas if you have one great idea
it could save this company 2 years 3
years four years the person who started
the local tire
shop and the person who started Google
probably worked about the same amount of
[Music]
hours all right right everybody welcome
back to the art of accomplishment I'd
really like to talk a little bit about
productivity
today and how how easy it is for
productivity itself to become sort of a
honic treadmill or you know a chasing
the dragon kind of obsession for
productivity's own sake and how easy it
is to lose the forest for the
trees in what it is that really aligns
with what we want and how to really go
after that and get that in a way that is
efficient
effective joyful regardless of what we
consider to be productive yeah I I
feel to some degree there's like there's
the very small epidemic of
productivity-minded folks who are all
learning how to be more and more
productive and then there's the larger
epidemic of people confusing getting
stuff done with creating the life if you
want what has your journey been around
productivity you've been a VC you've
been you founded AOA so you've been on
kind of a couple different sides of the
scenario you've been a coach when I was
starting my journey there really wasn't
too much of a productivity movement so
there wasn't a you know we didn't have
this digital lifestyle that we have now
which is just a [__] ton of information
which makes us forget a lot which means
we have to organize things and be more
productive and there was a little bit
there was like getting things done and
uh that book uh which had a positive
effect on me what I noticed in the very
beginning was that I would
procrastinate is that I I told myself to
do X Y and Z and then I would
procrastinate and not do those
things or do them at the last minute
or and
then when I found that I was doing
something that was really deeply aligned
with what I wanted there was no
procrastination there was just
doing and there was an addiction to that
doing and if I look back on that time in
my life almost all of it was
unnecessary like I could have literally
done one tenth of what I did when I was
a venture capitalist to get the exact
same result
and that recognition was huge for me oh
whoa and it's what makes us now in our
meetings when we're when we're doing
team meetings one of the things that we
do is check in on what's the pace and
what's the spin because I notice that
it's very hard to know if
our productivity is useful or if it's
just a
dopamine
fix but it's very easy to know if you
feel like you're spending which means
you're putting a lot of effort into
something and you don't see the thing
you want moving forward yeah could we
unpack that a little bit Pace pace and
spin what are pace and spin here yeah
for me pace is important because if
you're running a marathon which a
business
is you want to make sure your pace is
right are you doing it at a sustainable
Pace that's
enjoyable so that you want to come back
to work so that you can feel fulfilled
so that you want to make it you know
want to come back the next year not
going to burn
out if you really care about what you're
doing that's important if you're just
doing it for the money then you might
convince yourself to go really quick and
then sell the thing and then go to an
island in Hawaii where you typically end
up feeling irrelevant and then beating
yourself up for not creating your second
business I think we both know dozens of
people who fall into that yeah um that's
pace and then spin is when you can look
back on a week and say how how much of
it do I
think was productive was actually
getting us to the right place that we
wanted to go in um in an efficient way
in a way that didn't create a lot of
rowing against the
current and there's a Viewpoint of what
spin is for the week there's also a
Viewpoint of what spin is for the month
there's also a Viewpoint what spin is
for the year and those different ways of
thinking about spin are really important
because it tells us hey how much of what
we're doing is actually
productive
and and that's never completely easy to
see but it's a really important thing to
reflect
on and so so that my my in my journey
that came up then there there's also in
that same time frame where I would look
in my to-do list and it would go from
how do I get this done to what are the
three things that I can do on this list
that will make everything else easier
redundant and that started becoming a
practice
where my job wasn't to get things done
my job was to not do things and get them
done
yeah or make them
irrelevant um and then that became you
know a deep
practice then there was a recognition
that one of the most productive things I
could do is do the most uncomfortable
thing that there was a moment of seeing
that the thing I was most likely not
going to do was the thing thing I didn't
know how to do and was usually the most
important thing to do MH in in a if I
was creating a business or to get done
yeah and so that was also a pretty big
recognition and then there was a
recognition of oh I'm answering emails
but I'm not doing anything and that was
this moment I think to some degree made
so much more visible by the way social
media
slack emails text messages
work where it became really apparent
that the job was to be able to press
enter the job wasn't to move the ball
forward yeah I've answered the 20 emails
but did I do anything did anything
actually happened because I answered
those 20
emails and that was a huge one to see
that my mind was being tricked by a
dopamine
response that feels good that feels good
that feels good but I was a video game
and by the end of the video game maybe I
got to the next level but my business
wasn't forward nothing had changed
significantly and if nothing had changed
after an hour of
emails I could have done something for
an hour that would have changed yeah the
whole thing you have all these different
apps and structures that you use for for
your business or for running your life
and each of them is incentivized to
engage you right so individually they're
not istically incentivized for you to
have the best life they're incentivized
for you to use them more so you have
that already working against you but
then you also have the the cultural the
societal layer where often we're
reinforced for conspicuous productivity
conspicuous busyness or even yes you
know demonstrated or uh signal burnout
or near burnout just to show that we're
doing enough the place where you can see
most visibly is in a in large
corporations where people are responding
to text messages while they're in a
meeting getting stuff done apparently
but you
know two years later the company hasn't
grown productivity hasn't increased or
it's taking 10 times as many people to
do something that a startup would
do and it's be and they feel guilty if
they don't do it because I'm not
responding I'm not I'm not answering the
emails I'm not there for blah blah
blah instead
of oh if if I'm not fully present for
the thing that I'm here to do I'm
wasting everybody's time yeah I'm
getting the thing done but I'm also
degrading our meeting
culture I'm I'm getting a thing done
that probably doesn't mean [__]
yeah you know I was recently with a vice
president
of an organization big organization and
she was missing the 3-day offsite
of is where the CEO and all the vice
presidents sit
down I said whoa how do you feel about
that her response was I could ask Claude
what the meeting summary is and it would
be 80% accurate and I would have gotten
80% of what I was meant to get out of it
and
everybody who went will only also get
80% of what they were meant to get out
of it she's like I could literally tell
you what's going to happen how it's
going to happen it's all it's all a
known
quantity oh wow so I'm just thinking
about that that is each vice president
making $2
million a year like how much does that
how much does that three days
cost like what did that move forward
yeah and what were they distracted from
and what were they distracted from I'm
doing and how could you have made that
super productive where she was looking
forward to going and she knew that it
was critical to her business and that's
the underlying question and it's in each
meeting it's in each
decision is this how we're supposed to
be spending time is this a great use of
my time and so that and that's the stuff
that gets hidden from
productivity you said earlier something
to the effect of what's are we seeing
the force through the trees and I would
say if productivity is the trees what
what's the
forest I think most people don't know
what their Forest is yeah so how do we
assess that how does how does somebody
who's listening to this look at what
they're doing in their life right now
look at where they're feeling productive
where they're feeling unproductive what
are some really good questions for them
to ask and ways to explore this yeah
so the first question I would ask
is if you could have everything you
wanted and it didn't require you being
productive how would that be what would
you push that button to allow that to
happen the other way to ask that
question is what's all the productivity
for
actually is the idea that the
productivity will make you rich or is
the idea that the productivity will make
you happy or is the idea that the
productivity will make you rich so that
you can be happy is the productivity
meant so that people think you do a good
job so Dad will love you like what's all
the productivity meant
for because if you can't see that you
can't actually get to the real thing
that the productivity is is meant
for and it's why you can see people who
are Ultra productive as far as getting
tasks done starting companies
even being successful being rich but
there's no
fulfillment there's no there's no sense
of purpose yeah yeah they they say
things like I can't wait till I can
retire rather than you know I want to
die doing this so let's say somebody's
listening and they're like okay well
they just ask themselves this question
it's like well obviously so I can feed
my family this is the job that I have
this is the only opportunity that I am
aware of that is you know the best
opportunity for me so I just need to do
the things that my boss wants to get
done and serve the company and then I
can feed my family and that's it that's
it what's what is a way to get deeper
under a story like that to question
those assumptions and get to get to what
it is that somebody
really might not be aware that they're
doing the productivity for well in that
particular
one my question would be something like
how big of a role does safety
play in this if at all because it sounds
like what I'm hearing is that I want
you want to be safe
MH and so then the question becomes how
safe is your productivity making
you so I'll give you another example of
this I was in another company and a
whole bunch of middle managers we were
training 100 middle managers and it was
clear that AI was going to come in and
take half of their
jobs and that means for all of them
there was an opportunity to be the
person to implement AI in this role and
then they would have job for the next
next 10 years implementing AI either
within this company or within other
companies that would make you
safe but what most people were doing was
making sure that they were doing the
tasks that their boss would be happy
with not making them safe making them
redundant so if you really can get in
touch with what's below the thing if if
in this case it's safety then you can
really ask the question how is my prodct
productivity aimed at actual safety
right and in that case it might have
been aimed at safety it also might have
been aimed at making the boss Happy who
does the boss represent for you and what
does like how does that get linked to
the idea of
safety right yeah so you make the boss
happy what's the per so what if your
boss is happy right well then I keep my
job or then I don't have to hear them
yell so both safety yeah imagine imagine
getting cut loose in a company and you
go to get your new job and you're like
well I was really good at making my last
boss happy that's that's what my that's
what my skills are exactly exactly it's
really being able to go as deep as you
can to
the to the underlying thing that the
productivity the promise that of that
productivity the product is a promise
that it's going to keep you safe is a
promise that it's going to make you rich
is the promise that it's going
to make you likable and then then you
can start seeing well is it is that
actually happening and if so how do I
make that productivity better and what I
notice is most people they just get
hooked on the dopamine I got stuff done
today and that feels
good but it's it's it it is literally
Paramount to playing a video game for
eight eight hours a
day you get that same kind of feeling at
the end like if you have ever played
video for hours there's a feeling you
get at the end of it which is you're not
all the way
there you feel like oh my God this is
this was not a great use of my day MH
you're you know there's a there's an
emotional hangover that comes with it
which is where I think a lot of people
end a day of
productivity whereas if your
productivity was really serving your
purpose in
life what you are meant to do and your
productivity is geared towards enjoyment
of your life and making your life
meaningful and it's very different
feeling being productive at the end of
the day yeah so I'm noticing there's a
couple different time Horizons that
we're talking about here and we've kind
of gone into the what's the end point
what is your what is your productivity
really pointing towards and then you
just alluded to the way that you feel
while you're being productive and I'd
love to double click on that a little
bit so when you're when you're
responding responding to emails or your
checking out the to-do list what are
some ways that somebody could explore
their experience in the moment of
running whatever their typical
productivity pattern is like how much
enjoyment they're feeling how much
dopamine they're getting
from whatever it is that they're doing
and whether that's Linked In the
direction that would take them to the
end points that we were just talking
about so definitely enjoyment is a great
pointer as you just as you just said the
other one is is
energy how much energy do you have to
get [__] done that
day and at the end of the day do you
feel more energized or less
energized even if you're fatigued you
can still feel
energized um oh I can't wait for
tomorrow I'm tired it feels good I get
to rest and I I can't wait for tomorrow
M even just looking at how did that day
energize me how did that meeting
energize me incredibly useful for
productive and productivity and being
productive for
example I know three
things that will take my energy from me
one is back-to-back
meetings if I don't have a way to close
a cycle if I don't have a little bit of
rest Cal recalibrate what just happened
get back into myself after a meeting and
I go meeting to meeting to meeting to
meeting I feel like I have a whole bunch
of
un like open threads open Loops that
aren't closed in my life and it totally
sucks the energy out of
me yeah I know context switching takes a
lot of energy from me so if I can do one
whole day of coaching and then one day
of podcasts and then one day
of teaching I have a far more energy
than if I
am having a business meeting followed by
a coaching meeting by and so I'm just
checking out where my energy level is
checking in on the sense of spin is
another one how much do I feel like I'm
spinning how much
of how much of the effort that I'm
putting in to pedaling is actually
moving the bike forward so in that
particular
instance a great example is I used to
say this to CEOs all the time when I was
a venture capitalist your job isn't to
work hard your job is to have great
ideas if you have one great idea it
could save this company two years three
years four
years the person who started the local
tire
shop and the person who started Google
probably worked about the same amount of
hours there are plenty of people who
worked their butts off and got laid off
and don't have a
job how how how are you thinking about
the
what you're doing and how do you choose
the things that you're putting your time
towards is a huge component and and that
can mostly be felt in spin yeah and then
the other thing you can do is take a
moment to reflect every once in a while
okay I just worked for an
hour what did I actually
do and you don't get to say responded to
people responded to people isn't a thing
you do like what did I actually move
forward
what what project did I actually move
forward and so there's something really
sweet about retrospectively looking at
how did I spend my week is that how I
want to spend my week that's also really
useful it's not quite in the moment but
it's it's in the very near term yeah
yeah there's there's a lot to go into
there one one of the things in the first
one that you mentioned about closing the
loop is interesting to me I I found that
sometimes I can get into a cycle where
I'm feeling
productive and I'm going through say
like a checklist and I'm getting things
done and there's a way that when I when
I complete a task I immediately skip
over the appreciation the enjoyment the
the S the the celebration even just for
a moment of taking that task and then go
on to the next one so there can actually
be this is where chasing the dragon
comes in the honic treadmill where we
might be chasing a sense of completion
but we never actually let ourselves
Savor any completion that we get along
the way and so we're looking for a loop
to close that we never allow to close
and to me it's completion is a word for
it release and relax is what I notice is
you know if I'm going to do a
high-intensity workout 20 seconds on 10
seconds off 20 seconds on 10 seconds off
30 seconds on 20 seconds off whatever it
is if I'm going to do yoga
I'm going to have shasa at the end of it
relaxation is a really not even
appreciation appreciation is great sense
of satisfaction that it's done those are
great those that's I think more of the
release side of it there's also the
relaxation side of it just yeah I had a
friend who was a programmer and he
literally every week would try different
forms of programming 45 minutes on 15
minutes on off 3 hours in the morning
everything else off just tried different
things and then looked how much code he
got done because if you're a programmer
especially back in the day it was
literally how many how much good code
got written and you could happily
measure that
and and he found that it was 6 hours a
day 45 minutes on 15 minutes off 5 days
a week was his Peak Performance he could
not do any better as far as lines of
productive code
you can't run 247 and be a great
marathon
runner something that's interesting
about that too is just by running
through a number of different iterations
of the experiment he was also
necessarily breaking up some other
patterns that he might not have been
aware of for example the pattern of
getting into the zone and then mistaking
the zone for productivity the zone for
moving in the right direction just cuz
you're
focused yeah yeah that's right yeah he
would be totally excited and engaged in
something and in the zone and the alarm
would go off and he would stop yeah and
and the 15 minutes off for him he found
was all about being in the
body so it was I am running in place I
am doing jumping jacks I am stretching I
am something laying down on my back and
being silent whatever it was he was
always in his body for those 15 minutes
yeah and that's curious too because from
one perspective being in your body
during those breaks for example you were
describing how there's the rest and
release part of the closing of a loop
and I I also imagine that if you get
back into your body if you check in with
your body your body will also have a
signal of whether you're you've been
going in the right direction or not
there will be some way where you're like
wait a minute something just doesn't
feel right so there's a huge difference
if you're coating completely from your
head or if you're present in your body
while you're cating even
cating yeah you guaranteed there's more
flow if you have some awareness of your
body while you're
coding or if another person is doing the
same thing sitting next to you or if you
have a zoom window open and someone else
is co-working with you and you're just
getting things done but you're in each
other's presence that's another
fascinating hack that people have been
using yeah that's right you know a lot
of a lot of what we perceive as like
inattention add kind of behaviors around
productivity can be traced back to
attachment and connection and so yeah in
in those
cases creating a context where you feel
connection while you're doing what
you're doing can be the hack it's not
necessarily about how you timed it but
about the environment you place yourself
in correct yeah so I know a lot of
people who want to start their own
businesses entrepreneurial in spirit but
they just can't do it and then they pick
someone to do it with and they can
totally do it you know it's just like
people who let's say your productivity
is about your phys physical health you
there's going to be people who will not
do physical health stuff unless they're
doing it with
somebody so there's yes there's the
context of how you do it who you do it
with so much stuff there
and primarily it's what am I doing this
for and it's that that's not a question
you
ask every month it's a question you ask
every
day that little thing and for me
when I'm in in our business and I look
at an email it's really clear or watch a
meeting it's really clear if people are
being productive in that meeting or in
that email or if they're not meaning
real productivity mean they're really
moving the ball
forward are they just thinking out loud
are they delegating their decision
making are
they trying to build consensus instead
of make a decision are they like a whole
bunch of stuff that is not about getting
the job
done and you can tell it it's very easy
to watch and see what's happening and
when that's happening the question is
how do you address it and change it
yeah and I think that points to kind of
a key differentiator between what one
one might call productivity 1.0 and
productivity 2.0 or you can go through
your life stacking new productivity
tools hacks tricks on top of one another
until you have a palum sest one of my
favorite words uh like a bunch of
spaghetti code of the ways that you
structure your productivity and end up
in a mess or lost in it or having those
structures slow you down until you get
to a point where you start to just
remove structure I have a to-do list
that is just generally a reminder that I
will visit every couple days but I don't
even work off of a list in a day if I
work off of anything I work off my
calendar calendar um and I have a very
very clear and deliberate way in which
my calendar gets made part of what was
really important to me was that I didn't
have weight in my productivity I wasn't
spending two hours a day organizing all
my productivity tools so that I could be
productive that day I could not do slack
I just no I will not do slack it is it
was just so not productive for me what
I've noticed is that if I really spend a
lot of time on the design of my
interactions than most of the
productivity is taken care of
naturally yeah and so that's that's
another piece here where for somebody
who recognizes that they've gotten to
say productivity bloat and they start
taking things away one of the things
that I noticed that you start taking
away is you stop engaging engaging in
certain kinds of patterns like what you
described is you can join a meeting and
you can see what is being and what isn't
and that sounds less like you're
following a structure and more like you
have developed the awareness of various
patterns those patterns particularly the
kinds of patterns that you might be
prone to getting swept up in then sort
of the the training wheels of structure
to keep that from happening become less
necessary until eventually they fall
away yeah agreed and and I think one of
the things to really become aware of
quickly is what does a dopamine High
look like
or feel like what does it look like what
does it feel like how do you know when
you're in it how do you stop it that's a
really important one that's one of the
most important
ones and and then what does it look like
feel like to reflect to take a moment
and reflect and it doesn't need to be a
long
moment what I notice is that it needs to
be relatively
often oh what what did today feel like
how what what actually occurred today
what did I actually get done how much of
that was really useful like that just
those questions really quickly are
really important and then i' i' imagine
some Nuance there you can make yourself
a whole another to-do list while you're
in your reflection which is a very
different experience than stepping back
reflecting just noticing not necessarily
creating new thought Loops while
you're resting
yeah the reflection is the release and
then there's resting which is literally
nothing and that's an important piece
too the the the other thing that I
notice a lot a lot of productivity is
very fear-based it's a very fear-based
thing there's a anxiety shortness of
breath in in the
productivity like I notice that when I'm
going through like oh it's it's 4:00 in
the afternoon and I'm going through my
emails am I still breathing breathing
deeply am I am I present in my email
response am I taking a moment to really
oh what's the real thing I'm doing here
and what's the real answer I want to
give or am
IAM bam yeah and and that and when I'm
being my most
productive I'm in a very present state
in my body and when I'm being less
productive I'm in a more fear anxious
got to get it done state
and so usually what happens is most
people who are deeply interested in
being
productive are in a fierce State often
when they
are when they are doing productivity
there's a Time poverty to
it yeah it reminds me of a time when you
know Alexa and I had been traveling and
I left something at the airport and I
was all in my phone like oh [__] I got
to reach out to the customer service
maybe they'll find my
thing and I was like
in this got to get this thing done and
Alexa was just like what if you just
pause for a moment and feel that anxiety
for a
second I like oh and just all a sudden
just like collapsed under her shoulder
for like 5 seconds and then it was just
done I
just very gently sent a message to the
customer service app and then put it
down and then later got a response it
was a bunch of struggling just got saved
by stopping to feel the anxiety yeah
exactly and so that's also like that's
such an incredibly useful productivity
hack is Feel the fear behind the the the
the the production that's happening
which is also something that's really
ties back into where we started the
conversation which is what is
the what is the Force Through the Trees
of productivity MH
what I notice is that
typically people who want the
productivity to create some sort of
safety are doing it in a very anxious
way and if they're doing it to be liked
they're doing it in a very needy way
that there's
a if they're doing it to manage the
world to try to make the world into
something they're doing it usually in a
very forceful way that the there's a
there's a clue in the way that you are
productive
that hints to what what the yeah what
the implicit Forest is and then making
it explicit can see through the implicit
Forest yeah you can find out what on
some level what you're actually you
could say addicted to what's the
emotional cycle what's the if I'm coming
at productivity to feel safe and I'm not
allowing myself to feel the anxiety in
it then I'm going to be productive in a
way that is leaking anxiety everywhere
and everyone around me is going to pick
up that anxiety and I'll create a world
where everything is anxious the amazing
thing is there's somebody listening
right now who's like none of this [__]
where you just got to get [__] done just
[__] put your head down so for them I
would just like to
say last week I
worked from you and I both worked doing
a a week long we worked from
from 7:30 in the morning till 10 10:30
at night average sometimes longer
sometimes a little shorter for seven
days
straight and this week I'll be doing
four podcasts one live
performance running the business seeing
eight
clients and and still making time for my
family and still making sure that my
girls are attended to and that my
marriage is healthy and
that happens I I can be that productive
and occasionally I get a little burnt
out because I've bitten off more than I
can chew and I have a calendar that is
there's some obligation I feel like I've
committed to something I want to be
honest to my
word so get occasionally I'll go a
little bit too hard and fast but
generally I can four
years do a tremendous amount of
work and the reason I can do it is is
because there isn't as much inner
fight it isn't that I'm doing it from
anxiety it's that I'm I'm in my body
when I'm sending the emails it's because
I'm not for trying to force anything
there's it's because I'm I've learned
how to rest in between my things if you
get your pace right there's just this
constant flow of creativity and if you
start noticing your pace goes wrong then
there's this opportunity to learn
something about yourself oh I'm anxious
here what's making me anxious here what
makes it that I I don't feel like I'm I
can be present with this
conversation and so productivity turns
into these great moments of
self-reflection and self-growth
and that gets a lot of friction out of
the system increases the enjoyment keeps
you far more energized through the
day yeah
beautiful well thank you Joe this has
been a very productive
and I'm going to take a little time now
for reflection and
release before my
next
call next thanks everyone for listening
uh I appreciate you listening to our
podcast during your very productive day
or or maybe your relaxing day or your
commute whatever it is uh it's a
pleasure to be in your ears today yeah
it is you can find us at artof
accomplishment. comom check out our
community and our courses we often do
free uh online Zoom one and a half hour
sessions that you can experience some of
our experiential uh practices with a
partner it's a very different kind of
work than just listening to the podcast
passively highly recommend that you can
also find us on social media uh we're on
X Art OFA comp Joe is fuore Joe Hudson
that's [__] you Joe Hudson and I am Eric
kler
[Music]